---
title: Work from home tips - a guide to be productive at home
date: 2020-07-01 00:00:00
featured_image: ''
excerpt: ''
---

## Heading towards the entrance of an old tunnel

It has been I-forgot-how-many business days since I started to work from home in Australia due to COVID-19. Before the nationwide lockdown happened, My colleagues and I were anxiously waiting for an email to tell us that we can start working from home. And I clearly remember we cheered when we finally received the long-awaited "work from home" email. All of us happily went home and started to WFH without what's heading toward our way.
The first couple of weeks were great. I didn't need to drive to work which takes about 2 hours round trip. I enjoyed a better setup at home. However, that good feeling didn't last long. My working days slowly turned to a chaotic, unorganised mess that I can hardly get through. How did that happen? I'm glad you asked. If you are experiencing a similar struggle, follow me along into this "tunnel". After we go through the tunnel, I hope I can help you to find some peace in this unrest world.

## Entering the dark tunnel

The biggest challenge I found remote work has brought is communication. We have to retreat to lower bandwidth communication channels like texting or conference calls which make teamwork much less efficient. Video calls? Oh, I wish we have the proper network infrastructure that can support smooth video calls in Australia. But due to various limitations, audio calls are the best we have, at least for the company I work.

To demonstrate how bad this can get to, let me break out how I spend my eight working hours on a "bad" day. Meetings with different topics filled up in my Outlook calendar. It might be reasonable for a management role, but to an engineer, why would I need to attend so many meetings? When I start to get through the day, emails begin to fly into my inbox. They are the kind of email that needs immediate attention. If not, you're blocking other teams from progressing their tasks. In between handling of meetings and emails, I find some small pieces of time that I use to work on my planned assignment. A day like this is very exhausting. My mind keeps switching between different contexts. I'm always worried about missing a meeting or blocking other's work. As I can hardly concentrate, my efficiency drops as well, and this situation goes into a negative feedback loop. 

I'm glad that not every day is like what I describe, but at least once every week, I need to go through this. I felt like I entered a dark tunnel, and I was crawling through it. There is no end in sight to this mayhem. 

## A tiny light coming into view

One day, I saw one of my colleague's slack status saying "Deep Work" with a stop emoji. Hmmm, what's deep work? I thought. It sounds like the kind of work spies do. After a quick googling, I found there's a book called "Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World". This title shined a tiny light at the end of the tunnel, and I decided to read this book immediately.  

### TL;DR

// summarise the entire book in three simple sentences
Deep work is a valuable but rare skill in this digital world. 
This skill enables us to learn complicated things quickly and to produce top quality work. 
It is a skill that can be cultivated and trained with many techniques; however, that is not an easy path. 

This book is written by a successful computer science professor, Cal Newport. He's also known as a popular author of six self-improvement books, deep work being one of them.

In the first part of this book, Cal convinces the reader that deep work is significant in this digital world because it has two values.

### Learning

The information economy is built on complex systems, which are changing so rapidly, especially for things like programming languages, application frameworks, software, hardware, etc. It is nearly impossible to follow everything happening in the world. Therefore, the ability to learn and master new and complicated stuff becomes a core competitive edge in profession world.
For the three recent projects that I have worked on, all of them are built on different frameworks, using different languages and deployed on different cloud infrastructures. So it's crucial to be able to "hit the ground and run".
Deep work can facilitate fast learning as it forces you to enter a highly concentrated state. 

### Perfection

The digital network revolution creates a significant impact on our choices of products. If a product is useful, its reach is virtually limitless. Thus, only the ones that are in the lead can survive in the network. Deep work pushes us to a state that we can produce high-quality work, which helps us to seek perfection so we can thrive in this world.

## Walking towards the exit

After finished "Deep Work", I learned quite a few useful techniques that can help concentrate and improve productivity in day-to-day work life. Although the methods might not work in all industries, I would like to share them, and hopefully, they will help you find some peace in this unprecedented time.

### The power of routine

No doubt that focusing on something is quite hard nowadays; you need to fight heaps of distractions to be able to sit down and work on one and only one thing. Our mind behaves just like electricity which always flows through the least resistant path (the path with lest Electrical resistance). It continually tries to pick something that needs less brainpower to process. For example,  if you have two things on the to-do list, one of them is a well-defined task that you know how to do it from head to toe, the other one is an ambiguous task that takes a while to investigate and discover. I believe you already know which job your mind prefers? And of course, your mind will try to lure you into doing what it prefers to do. However, this kind of work is not challenging, and it does not contribute to your professional growth. So to pick the harder path to walk, you will need tremendous will power to steer your mind to something hard but meaningful. However, a person's will power is finite, and it depletes as you use it. There is an excellent way to save this limited will power, developing a routine and set it on auto-pilot. Setting up a routine for deep work is not hard, but it might take a while to adapt. You can block out specific times in the calendar for concentrated deep work. The times I chose are right after the lunch break and the last business hour, about 1.5 to 2 hours per day. These times are less likely to have meetings scheduled as well as disturbed by others. If there is a meeting scheduled at the routine deep work time, I would suggest to reschedule it so you can stick with your routine and be more productive. Don't forget to include rests in the routine. It is an essential step to recharge your will power and energy which you will need for deep work.
Developing such a routine is easier said than done, so try making it as fun as possible. You can use techniques such as "Don't break the chain." to keep yourself motivated.

### Schedule for distractions

Now with the deep work routine in place, what should you do with the rest of the day? 
// Todo: 
Point: You should plan for distractions. Here's how I do it. And why?
Every morning before I start checking emails and chat history, I take 3 minutes to plan for how should I spend today's eight business hours. As you can see from the photo, I use three colours to indicate what level of distraction I can have. 
Blue means meeting, I can access nothing but the mute button and meeting materials. I know it's very tempting to do something trivial when you're not talking, but that takes you out of the meeting context, which consumes your will power to concentrate. It's not worth to spend that precious will power on something insignificant and irrelevant. On the other hand, if all attendees are focused, meetings can usually finish quicker than when attendees are occasionally distracted. That saves up time which you can put into deep work. 
Yellow means deep work (aka my deep work routine); I can access Google to search for work-related topics such as API documentation and StackOverflow, nothing more than that. Ideally, you should be disconnected from the Internet if you can. However, I understand that it is a bit difficult for a developer to work without asking Google a couple of things. Therefore, you can relax the rules depend on the industry. I use this time to focus on designing solutions, implementing functions or discover better ways to do things. 
Last but not least, it is the grey area, which means I can access the entire Internet, including emails, Slack and even Youtube. This time is usually for team collaboration, defects handling and chitchats. 
As you can see, most of my day is still coloured in grey, as abandon communication with the team is impossible. Whereas that doesn't mean how busy you are and how fast you respond to messages/emails represents your value. It is a typical mentality that knowledge workers, including me, have, especially when working from home. I reckon this is the cause of an unpleasant, unorganised working day, as I described earlier.
Overall, scheduling can help you take control of your day and achieve more in a day. Of course, you do not have to stick to the plan 100%, instead try to do your best. Pat yourself on the back even if you have to change your schedule during the day.

### Disconnect

Disconnect from the Internet is such an obvious move to avoid distractions but, to be honest, it is one of the toughest things I've ever done during WFH. During my deep work hours, I close my Outlook app and set my status on Slack to away with a status telling people if they need to reach out to me, come back in, for example, an hour. By doing this, I'm free from any communications from outside. I know, it is a scary thing to do but trust me, the world won't collapse if you are offline for an hour or so. I've done it many times now, and it hasn't brought me any troubles. What I did not expect is my colleagues seem to respect my short absence without me explaining anything to them. Messages start to flow through once I set myself back online, and nobody ever complained. In exchange, I work more efficiently and produce much better quality code during this period. 
Disconnect from whatever distracts you is both the easiest and hardest thing to do, but I strongly recommend trying it out.

### Communicate smarter

The allocated distraction-filled periods are still valuable. There are a couple of small things you can do to help you improve efficiency even you are in distraction mode.
First of all, let's sort out how to deal with emails. If I have a list of tools I use ordering from best to worst, it is probably at the bottom. However, we have to face it; it is still irreplaceable in many corporations. The first action you can take is to create rules to sort your inbox automatically. For instance, you can group emails into different folders by their source. I have one folder dedicated to everything sent by Confluence and JIRA. These emails are usually just to notify you something has changed on a ticket or a page. Automated rules are excellent to help me remove this kind of useless emails out of my inbox. I set up another rule to move all Github emails to another folder. These emails usually are related to PR reviews, which is quite important to me. Hence having them in one place saves me time to sift through my inbox to find them. You can define your own rules to suit your use cases. The principle is to have your email client work for you, so you don't need to spend time to find important emails from a pile of trivial information.
When handling email, I would also suggest you spend a little bit more time when writing replies. Sometimes, even do not reply to emails. The aim is to save more time in the long term. I often see emails going back and forth multiple times with short messages. This approach wastes time for both parties. A quick reply in the short term provides you with some relief as you bounce the responsibility off your court. However, the ball will be kicked back to you, again and again, continually sapping your time and attention. To provide a better response, you need to focus not only on the current step but also the next step. It can significantly mitigate the impact on distractions email brings; for example, it reduces the number of emails in your inbox as well as context switches when going back and forth. 
Sometimes, it would be better not to reply to an email at all. If any of the following applies to an email, it's probably better not to respond.
It's ambiguous
Nothing good will happen if you reply, and nothing bad will happen if you don't reply
Avoiding replies to these kinds of emails can prevent confusing other people as well as sparking unnecessary worries. In turns, it saves time to provide further explanations.
With these tricks, you should be able to win some time back from what we used to process emails. Hooray, one second saved is one more second for deep work.

## Finally walking out of the tunnel

After reading "Deep Work" and applying these principles, techniques to my work life, I feel much more satisfied as I am more productive and happy. To leave the distracted masses and join the focused few is like walking out of the dark tunnel, you will enjoy the sunshine in this cold winter.