---
title: Road to Go pro - Part 2 - Types & Structures
date: 2020-08-26 00:00:00
featured_image: 'https://storage.googleapis.com/songxue-dev-images/content-images/2020-08-26-road-go-pro-2/feature.jpg'
excerpt: 'Road to Go Pro is a series of short Go (the programming language) tutorials that take you from a beginner to a Pro. This part is about basic types and data structures.'
---

*Before we start, you can find the code used in this tutorial in this [repository](https://github.com/songx23/RoadToGoPro).*

## Primitive types

Primitive types are the most basic types we use in a programming language. Go has four main primitive types namely boolean, integer, float and string. Let's look into each one of them and see what their values can be. 

### Boolean

Boolean is the simplest primitive type. It has only two possible values, true and false.

```go
// primitive type: boolean
var isGoAwesome bool
isGoAwesome = false  // just kidding!
isGoAwesome = true
fmt.Println(isGoAwesome)
```

### Integer

Go has multiple integer types. We can categorise them into two groups.  
First group is signed integers (normal integers). Depending on the integer size, there are multiple types `int`, `int8`, `int16`, `int32`, `int64`.  
And the other group is unsigned integers, which means integers larger or equal than zero. Similarly, we have `uint`, `uint8`, `uint16`, `uint32`, `uint64`.  
Specifically, type `int` and `uint` are at least 32 bits in size, however, they are different than `int32` and `uint32`. The later has fixed size.  
Normally, if you don't a specific use case, using `int` to present integer is a good choice. If you want to represent byte, then you should use unsigned integer `uint8`. In fact, Go has an alias type for `byte = uint8`.  

```go
// primitive type: integer
var integer int
integer = -10
integer = 10
fmt.Println(integer)

var followerCount uint32
followerCount = 10000
// overflow error
// followerCount = -1000
fmt.Println(followerCount)
```

### Float

Floating numbers are numbers with decimal place. There are two types of floating number in Go, `float32` and `float64`.  
`float32` is 32-bit floating point number and `float64` is 64-bit floating point number.  
*`float32` is the equivalent of `float` type in Java/C# and `float64` is the equivalent of `double` type*

```go
// primitive type: float
var balance float32
balance = 10000.01
fmt.Println(balance)
```

### String

String is a set of characters. There is no types specifically representing characters in Go.  

```go
// primitive type: string
var text string
text = "Go is fun."
fmt.Println(text)
```

### nil

`nil` is a special value in Go, which means zero value. It is the same thing as `null` in other programming languages. For the primitive types mentioned above, their value cannot be `nil`.  
For the primitive types, if we don't assign values to them, they will be assigned to a default value.

|primitive type|default value|
|----|-------------|
|boolean|false|
|integer|0|
|float|0.0|
|string|""|

### Declare variable

In the example code blocks above, you can see how you can declare a variable and assign value to it. Whereas, there is an easier and more common way to do the same thing. When declaring variables, Go can interpret the type by the value assigned to it.

```go
// import "reflect"
isGoAwesome := true
fmt.Println(reflect.TypeOf(isGoAwesome)) // output: bool
integer := 100
fmt.Println(reflect.TypeOf(integer)) // output: int
float := 100.1
fmt.Println(reflect.TypeOf(float)) // output: float64
text := "Go is fun"
fmt.Println(reflect.TypeOf(text)) // output: string
```

## Composite types

### Array

### Slice

### Map

### Struct

### Interface

## Type conversion & Type assertion

### Conversion

### Assertion

## strings and fmt package

### strings package

### format package

## What's next?

In the next part, we will talk about loops and logic flows. Stay tuned and I will see you in the next one.

**Please feel free to leave a comment below if you run into any problems or if you need a helping hand.**  
