---
title: Road to Go pro - Pointer & Functions
date: 2020-09-23 00:00:00
featured_image: "https://storage.googleapis.com/songxue-dev-images/content-images/2020-09-23-road-go-pro-4/feature.jpg"
excerpt: "Road to Go Pro is a series of short Go (the programming language) tutorials that take you from a beginner to a Pro. In this tutorial, we are going to talk about the flow control, loops and the fmt package in Go."
---

_A few words before we start._
_You can find the code used in this tutorial in this [repository](https://github.com/songx23/RoadToGoPro)._  
_Also a special thanks to [Mark Hume-Cook](https://medium.com/@mhumecook) for reviewing this tutorial._

We talked about flow controls and loops in the last part of the tutorial. In this tutorial, we will cover pointers and functions. After finishing this tutorial, you are well equipped to start writing scripts or console applications using Go.

## Pointers

If you have used C or C++, you already know what's a pointer. Whereas, the most popular programming languages like Java, C#, Javascript, Python, etc. don't have an explicit syntax to represent pointers. So I think most of the people, like me, don't know what is a pointer when I first heard of this name.  
In short, pointer holds the underlying memory address of a value. Whoa, hold on, memory address? That sounds so 1980.

> When do we need to know the memory addresses of variables?

That's a good question but before we explore the scenarios, we need to take a quick detour. Lets quickly learn how to declare pointers in this section and how to use them in the next [section](#functions). Once we have covered these basics, it will be easier for you to understand the reasoning and examples below. So hang in there. If you already knew the basics and you can't wait to know why, please jump straight to the [Back to pointers](#back-to-pointers) section.

### Declaring pointers

Whenever we declare a variable in Go, the runtime [Fact check] allocates a segment of memory in the physical RAM. The value of that variable is stored there until it's recycled by the garbage collector.  
Pointers are composite data types. We form a pointer type by adding a `*` in front of the data type it points to. For instance, `*string` represents the type of a pointer which points to a string.
To get the pointer value of an existing variable, we add a `&` in front of the variable.

```go
pointer := "I'm a string, not a pointer"
// declare a pointer type
var pointerType *string
pointerType = &pointer
// declare a pointer directly
p := &pointer
fmt.Printf("String: %s\nPointerType: %v\nPointer: %v\n", pointer, pointerType, p)
// output:
//   String: I'm a string, not a pointer
//   PointerType: 0xc000010200
//   Pointer: 0xc000010200
```

We mentioned that we don't need to specify the data type when declaring variables in the [previous tutorial](https://medium.com/swlh/road-to-go-pro-types-structures-21e5fedc5fe0). This applies to pointer types as well. In the example above, the type of variable `p` will be inferred as `*string` automatically.  
We can also access or set the stored value via a pointer by using `*` to dereference the pointer.

```go
fmt.Printf("Dereference pointer: %v\n", *p)
// output:
//    Dereference pointer: I'm a string, not a pointer

*p = "Pretending to be a pointer now."
fmt.Printf("New value set via pointer: %v\n", *p)
fmt.Printf("Variable value changed: %s\n", pointer)
// output:
//    New value set via pointer: Pretending to be a pointer now.
//    Variable value changed: Pretending to be a pointer now.
```

Note that when dealing with pointers, we need to keep `nil` in mind as not like primitive types or composite types, the default value of a pointer is `nil`. Therefore, we need to be careful of nil pointer dereference, also known as NullPointerException in Java/C#.

```go
// nil pointer
var nilPointer *int
fmt.Printf("nil pointer: %v\n", *nilPointer)
// output:
//    panic: runtime error: invalid memory address or nil pointer dereference
```

## Functions

Functions, also known as methods, are reusable logic which performs specific tasks. You can think of it as a "factory". It takes 0 to n numbers of arguments and returns 0 to n numbers of results. The structure of a function looks like this:

```go
func (receiver) function_name (input_arguments) (output_arguments) {
    // some dark magic here...
}
```

Receivers, input arguments and output arguments are three optional components we can specify when declaring a function.

### Input/Output

Firstly, let's talk about input and output arguments. Input arguments are also known as function parameters, they are the ingredients passed into the factory. And output arguments are the return value(s) that the factory produces. Here is an example of a function with both input and output arguments declared.

```go
// function
func isCountryCovidSafe(country string) bool {
    // casting dark magic spell to determine requested country is covid safe or not
    return true // only to make the compiler happy
}
```

A string `country` is the input argument of `isCovidSafe` function. When specifying the input arguments, we need to declare their name first and then type. Whereas for output arguments, we normally only declare types.  
If we have more than one input arguments, we can use a handy shortcut to shorten the declaration of inputs when part of the arguments has the same type.

```go
// function input arguments shortcut
func isStateCovidSafe(country, state string) bool {
    // casting dark magic spell to determine requested state is covid safe or not

    return true // only to make the compiler happy
}
```

For instance, now `isStateCovidSafe` function takes an extra argument `state` and it is the same type as `country`. Instead of declaring types of the argument twice like `(country string, state string)`, we can omit the duplicated type declaration. However, this is only applicable to input arguments. For output arguments, we have to specify them individually even they are the same type. On another note of outputs, when we have more than one output arguments, we need to wrap the types with brackets `()`. For example, if a function returns two strings, then the function should look like `func func_name(inputs string) (string, string) {}`. These brackets are not necessary if there is zero or one output argument.  
As mentioned above, input and output arguments are optional. However, a function without input and output arguments might not be very useful like the example below.

```go
func doNothing() {
    fmt.Println("This factory does nothing. Not very useful.")
}
```

### Value/Pointer Receiver

The example functions we've seen so far can be invoked anywhere inside the same package. Once we add a receiver component to a function, it makes that function a belonging of the receiver. Receivers are local types. In other words, we can't define functions using primitive types and types defined outside the current package. Let's start with defining a local type of `Person`.

```go
type Person struct {
    FirstName string
    LastName string
    Age int
}
```

Now we can add the `Person` type as receivers to functions. There are two forms of receivers in Go, they are value receiver and pointer receiver namely.

```go
// value receiver
func (p Person) FullName() string {
    p.Age = 100
    return fmt.Sprintf("%s %s\n", p.FirstName, p.LastName)
}

// invoke in main function
// creating a person first
person := Person {
    FirstName: "Jon",
    LastName: "Snow",
    Age: 23,
}
// invoke full name function
fullName := person.FullName()
fmt.Print(fullName)
// output: Jon Snow
fmt.Println(person.Age)
// output: 23

FullName() // invoking directly will get an undefined error.
```

`FullName()` has a value receiver of type `Person`. When declaring receivers, we need to state the receiver name and type. Receiver name is optional but the type is mandatory. If the receiver value is not used inside the function, we can omit the receiver name. The convention for receiver naming is using the first character of the receiver type. Inside the function, we can access the receiver value and use them to perform certain functions. However, the value receiver does not pass the original copy of `person` variable into the function. Instead, it passed a copy of `person`. Therefore, even we changed the age inside the function, it's not going to affect the original variable. You see the Jon Snow is still 23. Phew.  
If we want to change the original value of a receiver, we need to use the other kind of receiver, pointer receiver.

```go
// pointer receiver
func (p *Person) ChangeName(newFirstName, newLastName string) {
    if newFirstName != "" {
        p.FirstName = newFirstName
    }

    if newLastName != "" {
        p.LastName = newLastName
    }
}

// invoke in main function
// spoiler alert!
person.ChangeName("Aegon", "Targaryen")
fmt.Printf("Jon Snow is %v\n", person)
// output: Jon Snow is {Aegon Targaryen 23}
```

Pointer receiver passes a pointer to the original value into the function. Thus, when we modify its values, it's going to affect the original value. Most of the time, I use pointer receivers over value receivers because it can avoid copying the receiver value. Hence, pointer receivers are more efficient. However, I want to point out that the pattern of using pointer receivers to change the value of receivers is not ideal. I would avoid using this pattern because it makes the codebase harder to maintain. We don't want to use any dark magic in functions.

### Implementing an interface

We learned what is an interface in the [previous tutorial](https://medium.com/swlh/road-to-go-pro-types-structures-21e5fedc5fe0). To quickly recap, an interface is a collection of function declarations. It defines what needs to be done without telling you how to do the job.  
To implement an interface, we need to define a struct and this struct needs to have all the declared functions of that interface. When implementing the required functions, we have to use either the value receiver or the pointer receiver in the function declaration.

```go
// The following interface and struct should be declared outside of main function
// declare an interface
type Animal interface {
    // function sets
    Eat()
    Drink()
}
// implement an interface
type Dog struct {Name string}
func (d Dog) Eat() {
    fmt.Printf("%s eats meat\n", d.Name)
}
func (d Dog) Drink() {
    fmt.Printf("%s drinks water\n", d.Name)
}
// Following code should be inside main function
// declare a variable with interface type
var poodle Animal
poodle = Dog{Name: "Bolt"}
poodle.Eat()   // output: Bolt eats meat
poodle.Drink() // output: Bolt drinks water
```

Go automatically recognises `Dog` struct implements `Animal` interface because `Dog` struct has implemented all the declared functions in `Animal` interface.

> You might wonder why don't we use pointer receivers when implementing functions?

Good question! We can use a pointer receiver but the implication will be a bit different.  
Now let's create a struct called `Cat` and we will use pointer receivers when implementing `Animal` interface.

```go
type Cat struct {Name string}
func (c *Cat) Eat() {
    fmt.Printf("%s eats fish\n", c.Name)
}
func (c *Cat) Drink() {
    fmt.Printf("%s drinks milk\n", c.Name)
}
var ragdoll Animal
ragdoll = &Cat{Name: "Lightning"}
ragdoll.Eat()   // output: Lightning eats fish
ragdoll.Drink() // output: Lightning drinks milk
```

Here, `*Cat` implemented `Animal` interface instead of `Cat` because we used pointer receivers in `Eat()` and `Drink()`.

> So, which way is better?

To answer this, we need to get back to the question of when do we need to know the memory address of a variable in the first place. In other words, when do we need to use pointers?

## Back to pointers

Ok, I admit, that's a long detour. Now we know what is a pointer and how to use it. It's time to look at when should we use pointers and what we need to watch out when using pointers.

**A general rule of thumb is only use pointers if you absolutely have to. Otherwise, give it a pass.**

Here are some scenarios where you can consider using a pointer.

1. When you need to introduce nil value to types.  

Let's say you want to store people's decisions on whether they want to go to your party. There are three options available. First, a person can decide to join. Second, a person can decide to not join. And third, a person hasn't made the decision yet.  
Using `bool` as the field type is not going to meet the requirements as `bool` can only have two values, true and false. In this case, we can use pointers `*bool` and it can hold three values: true, false and nil.

```go
type Invitation struct {
    FirstName string
    LastName  string
    Going     *bool
}

// The follow code should be executed in the main function
invite := Invitation{FirstName: "Donald", LastName: "Trump"}
fmt.Printf("%v\n", invite)
// output: {Donald Trump <nil>}
```

Although `*bool` satisfies the requirements, it introduces a notorious side effect,  **nil dereferencing**.  
We need to safely check if `Going` field value is nil before dereferencing it. Otherwise, we will get hit by a runtime error: "invalid memory address or nil pointer dereference". This adds unwanted complexity to the handling of `Going` field and it's very error-prone as it's very easy to forget handling potential nil dereferences.  
There is a better way to solve this particular problem, which is using an enumeration to represent the `Going` field.  

```go
type Decision int

const (
    Going      Decision = iota
    NotGoing   Decision
    NotDecided Decision
)

Invitation struct {
    FirstName string
    LastName  string
    Going     Decision
}
```

*Note: `iota` is a keyword for simplifying the definitions of incrementing integers. For more information, please check out the [wiki](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Iota).

2. When choosing which receiver to use in a function.  

However, it also brings a side effect, which is accidental mutations. Unexpected data mutations make code harder to debug and maintain. I wouldn't mutate the pointer value. If I have to, I will make the mutation small and obvious. Like the example above, `ChangeName()` function mutates the first and last name of a person. It does a simple mutation and the function name makes the intention very obvious and clear to other people.

Here is a more detailed [guide](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/CodeReviewComments#receiver-type) about when to pick value receivers over pointer receivers.

3. When in need of singletons, pointers are the perfect fit.  

A [singleton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern) is something we only want to initiate once in the lifecycle of an application. For instance, when we need to integrate a third-party API, we might want to create a client for that API. This client can be a singleton. Or when we use want to cache in the application, the cache client can be a singleton, too.  

```go
type SlackClient struct {
	URL    string
	APIKey string
}

func NewPointerSlackClient(url, apiKey string) *SlackClient {
	return &SlackClient{
		URL:    url,
		APIKey: apiKey,
	}
}

func NewValueSlackClient(url, apiKey string) SlackClient {
	return SlackClient{
		URL:    url,
		APIKey: apiKey,
	}
}

type PointerService struct {
	SlackClient *SlackClient
}

func (*PointerService) Description() {
	fmt.Println("Pointer Client is a singleton.")
}

func NewPointerService(client *SlackClient) *PointerService {
	return &PointerService{
		SlackClient: client,
	}
}

type ValueService struct {
	SlackClient SlackClient
}

func NewValueService(client SlackClient) ValueService {
	return ValueService{
		SlackClient: client,
	}
}

func (ValueService) Description() {
	fmt.Println("Value Client is not a singleton.")
}

// The following code should be executed inside main()
pClient := NewPointerSlackClient("slack.com", "apiKey")
pService := NewPointerService(pClient)
pService.Description()
// output: Pointer Client is a singleton.
vClient := NewValueSlackClient("slack.com", "apiKey")
vService := NewValueService(vClient)
vService.Description()
// output: Value Client is not a singleton.
```

We normally initialise the singleton instance inside the `main()` function and then pass it to different parts of the codebase. In the example above, we created two potential singletons, `PointerSlackClient` and `ValueSlackClient`. If we pass the singleton as a function parameter like what we did for `ValueService`, then `ValueSlackClient` is not really a singleton anymore because when passing as a parameter, Go uses a copy of `ValueSlackClient`. Thus, we will have more than one instance of `ValueSlackClient`. When using a pointer, Go doesn't make a copy of the instance. So there is truly only one instance of `PointerSlackClient` inside the application.

These are some scenarios where I think we can make use of pointers. Whereas the number one rule is still:
> Avoid the use of pointers wherever possible.

## What's next?

We have learned data types, flow controls, loops, pointers and functions so far. These are the most basic building blocks of Go. In the next tutorial, we will look at Go from another angle. I will talk about packages, modules and how to start a Go project from scratch. Hope you find this tutorial helpful. Stay tuned if you want to read more about Go and I will see you in the next one.

**Please feel free to leave a comment below if you run into any problems or if you need a helping hand. Feedbacks are always welcomed. Thank you for reading!**
